Measuring leaves in digitized herbarium specimens
David Corney et al.
Abstract
The abstract. . .
1 Introduction
The world's major herbaria contain over XXX million specimens between them.
Many of these are of great botanical significance, and moreover, are extremely del-
icate. As imaging equipment, such as scanners and digital cameras, have improved
in quality while also becoming cheaper, many herbaria have embarked on large scale
digitization projects. These allow images of specimens to be shared widely with no
risk of loss or damage to the specimens themselves. Digital imaging also creates
the possibility of using image processing methods to automatically analyse images
of specimens, to allowed detailed comparison and modelling of specimens.
We show that leaf characters that are used by botanists to describe species can
be automatically extracted. This automation allows large data sets to be generated
easily, with minimal expert time. This latter point is especially important given
the ongoing shortage of skill taxonomists CITE various . By taking measurements
from thousands of leaves across a single taxon, we can derive descriptions of not just
\typical" specimens or average value of characters, but also of the full distribution
of specimens found. By reducing a set of values to a single mean, or a pair of values
defining a range, we may discard valuable information regarding the variance or
skew of the values CITE Stephen Jay Gould: Life's Grandeur .
1.1 Related work
1.1.1 Automatic leaf shape analysis
A substantial body of work exists describing various attempts to analyse the shapes
of leaves. In contrast to the present work, these typically rely on either images

that are carefully prepared, such that each image contains a single leaf on a plain
background, or else rely on manual editing of each image as a pre-processing stage
to remove everything from the image except the leaf iteself. Also, in most of these
studies, the leaves are chosen specifically for the analysis, and the specimens selected
are free from insect damage, mechanical damage and so on. The leaves found on
typical herbarium specimens are often damaged, before, during or after collection
and mounting, and may also be very old, leading to frailty and potential further
damage.
1
1.1.2 Manual leaf character exctraction
Manual measurements of leaf length, width etc., followed by statistical and/or com-
putational analysis of the results. CITE Clark etc. Rely on manual measurements,
such as blade length, petiole length, the presence or absence of hairs, the pattern of
venation, and so on.
1.1.3 Other uses of herbarium specimens
manual character extraction?
1.1.4 Other object recognition tasks
Face recognition, number plate, handwriting. All have much narrower range of
targets / more precisely defined target. And/or constrained input (e.g. airport
photo id requires people to stand facing camera, fixed distance, fixed lighting etc.)
2 Method
2.1 Image capture
Our main priority when digitizing the specimens is to create high-quality images
for subsequent processing. It is important to use a method that is consistent, so
that algorithms can be developed that will work on all the images without special
consideration. Create images with a sufficiently high resolution to allow features to
be extracted.
We chose equipment that is readily available at a moderate price, avoiding spe-
cialist or custom-built options. We hope that this will allow other users to follow
our methods, without requiring a large capital outlay. The kit is also quite compact,
suitable for use in a working herbarim, where space is often at a premium.
We also minimised the shadows cast by leaves and from external sources, by
placing each specimen in a diffuser box, so that available light (including daylight
from windows and nearby fluorescent lights) reaches all sides of the specimen equally.
We also used a dedicated ash unit, angled to bounce the light off the ceiling above
the specimen, to provide extra, uniform illumination without casting strong shadows.
If, as often happens, a leaf is not completely at, but is partially lifted off the
herbarium sheet, then it can cast shadows around the edge. Such shadows can
reduce the useful information content, and may make it harder to identify the precise
margin of the leaf.
We used a standard digital SLR (Canon EOS50D, taking 15.1 megapixel images);
a tripod; a diffuser screen (make XXX/model YYY); a ash (Canon XXXXX). We
selected a fixed-length lens (Canon 55mm f2.5) that has been shown to minimise
barrel and pin-cushion distortions [CITE website]. The aperture was fixed at f 11,
giving a large depth-of-field to minimise any focussing issues, even with specimens
which are not perfectly at. Also, mid-range apertures tend to produce minimal
distortion [CITE same website]. We captured and stored both JPEG and Canon
RAW format images, though only the JPEG images used here. These had a typical
file size of 6Mb.
2
We placed a Macbeth colour checker and a ruler on (or immediately beside)
each specimen. For the first preprocessing stage, we created simple algorithms to
automatically locate both the colour checker and the ruler. Where required, the
correct colour balance could be applied at this stage, possible working from RAW
image file. In this work however, we are not using colour as a character, so have not
carried out any colour correction.
We chose to photograph every specimen of Tilia available in the herbarium of the
Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, including type and non-type specimens. In particular,
we did not filter out specimens that seemed to contain mostly damaged leaves or
mostly overlapping leaves, despite the likelihhood that automatic processing of these
would be problematic. One of our aims is to determine the difficulty of automatic
processing of herbarium specimens in general, rather than only of manually selected
\easier" specimens.
For practical reasons, we had to assign each specimen to a single species within
the Tilia genus. To determine this using botanical keys or similar methods would
have required a great deal of time and expertise, neither of which are typically abun-
dant. Instead, we assumed in the first place that each specimen was filed in the
\correct" folder, and that each folder was labelled with the \correct" species (along
with any other taxonomic rank). We believe, however, that our methods are robust
enough to cope with some misplaced or mislabelled specimens; indeed, one of our
aims is to identify automatically any specimen that appears to be mislabelled or
placed in the wrong folder.
2.2 Locating leaf boundaries
We followed a modular approach to develop algorithms to locate leaves within images
of herbarium specimens. We recognise that some methods will work better than
others, depending on the particular chararacteristics of the leaves in the specimens,
and a modular approach allows particular aspects of the system to be easily changed
in isolation from the rest of the system. The broad approach we take is to identify
initally a broad set of regions in the image that might be leaves, and then refine
and improve the initial estimates until we have identified accurately a set of leaves
in the image, ready for subsequent character extraction. Throughout this section,
by \image" we refer to a digital photograph of a single herbarium specimen, as
described above in Section 2.1.
2.2.1 Stage 1: identify set of \candidate leaves'
The aim of this stage is find any and all regions of the image that could be a leaf. We
define each such region as a candidate leaf, defined by a continuous boundary. The
goal is to quickly find approximate boundaries of many candidate leaves, leaving
later stages to refine the boundaries or to reject candidates entirely, if they are not
in fact leaves. For example, this stage may falsely identify bracts, leaf fragments,
stems or other background clutter as leaves.
We use a deformable templates approach CITE , optimised using a simple ge-
netic algorithm CITE . Genetic algorithms (GAs) are simple stochastic optimisa-
tion algorithms, inspired by notions of Darwinian natural selection, that maintain
a population of candidate solutions that are iteratively improved though mutation,
3
cross-over and selection1. Deformable templates have been used in a variety of
object recogntion problems CITES , where the objects to be found vary in their
exact form. An initial template is defined, which is then deformed randomly un-
til its boundary largely coincides with a set of images found in the image under
consideration. Add diagram of deformable templates, GA etc.
In our work, the \chromosome" of the genetic algorithm defines the location,
orientation, scale and deformation of a template. The initlal template used was
a circle? isolated leaf? , and we follow the pattern of trigonometric deformations
defined by CITE def temp paper . This produces a series of deformed versions of
the template, such that the bounding contour always forms a continuous, closed
loop. While such deformations are powerful enough to match any shape, in practice
it takes a very large number of iterations to produce a close match, but only relatively
few to find an approximate match. We therefore defer the attempt to find the exact
boundary of the leaves in the image to the next stage.
2.2.2 Stage 2: refine candidate boundaries
In this stage, we take each candidate leaf boundary produced in the previous stage
and refine it so that it lies closer to the boundary between the candidate leaf object
and the herbarium mounting sheet. We use a snake edge detector CITE , optimised
using a level set method CITE to iteratively adjust the candidate leaf boundary
until it corresponds very closely to the high-contrast edges in the image. The level set
method works by maintaining a series of points on the current estimated boundary,
and moving them at a speed inversely proportional to the local gradient of the image.
The effect is that the line slows and stops moving as it approaches the edge of an
object (a very high local gradient), while it moves quickly across uniform regions.
After sufficient iterations, the boundary line will closely match the edge of the region
that it starts in.
The end result is a series of well-defined objects, although the set will still contain
a number of non-leaf objects, which we filter out in the next stage.
2.2.3 Stage 3: filter candidate leaf set to remove false positives
The aim of this stage is to remove from our set of candidate objects those that are
not in fact leaves. We do not want a system that is restricted to a single genus (or
any other taxon), but recognise that the diversity of leaves between genera makes
it very hard to define absolutely what consititues a leaf. Instead, we ask the user
to select a small number of leaves typical of the genus under consideration. This is
a very simple task: the user is presented with a number of candidate leaves, and
simply has to click on a few that are typical leaves. The user does not have to
identify the species (or provide any other taxonomic information), nor do they have
to carry out other time-consuming tasks such as drawing round the outline of a leaf.
In our case, a set of XXX leaves were chosen by one of us (DC) in a process that
took approximately YYY minutes.
This produces a hand-labelled subset of candidates representing leaves. Any
object that is found to be substantially different from these will be discarded, and
1In the current form, we do not use cross-over, so the algorithm is strictly speaking an evolution
strategy algorithm, relying on mutation and selection alone.
4
assumed to be wrongly extracted objects (e.g. bracts, owers, fruits etc.) or badly
damaged leaves (insect damage, mechanical damage etc.); or the result of multiple
overlapping leaves being extracted as if they were a single leaf. In this way, we
correct the \mistakes" made by the earlier stages of the process, which in turn
makes the earlier object locating stages less critical and easier to develop.
To compare each candidate object with the hand-labelled \good" leaves, we
convert both the hand-labelled leaves and the unknown candidate object's out-
lines to time-series, by tracing round the boundary from an arbitrary starting
point, and measuring the distance to the centroid of the object at each point
Add diagram showing time-series creation/comparison . Unlabelled objects can then
be compared to the set of \good" leaves by comparing the time-series. We are not
concerned with computational efficiency here, though savings could be made (cite
Keogh).
Single-class classification, as a form of outlier detection, is then used. We assume
that all (reasonably) healthy, undamaged leaves will share broad shape characteris-
tics, whereas damaged or incorrectly extracted leaves will differ in arbitrary ways.
2.2.4 Alternatives
2.3 Extracting leaf characters
Given a set of points on the boundary of a leaf, the simplest feature to extact is the
area. By itself, this can be useful for identifying species (cite). Other shape features
such as leaf length and width require identification of the primary vein and/or the
insertion point and leaf tip. Here, we consider area as a first character to extract
and process.
Published ora typically describe many characters of leaves, of starting with the
length and width, which are often useful for helping to identify taxa, and are easy
for a (human) botanist to measure.
2.3.1 Leaf length
We define the length of a Tilia leaf as being the straight-line distance from the
insertion point to the tip. To determine the length, we must therefore locate both
points. To do so, we combined several methods, as no single method worked across
all the leaves being analsysed. We assume that the primary vein runs from the
insertion point to the tip; that the leaf is approximately symmetric along this vein.
 Difference of Gaussian filters | to enhance contrast of veins with respect to
the leaf blade;
 Hough transform | to find the primary veins, which are (nearly) straight;
 Local morphological search | analysing the rate of change of gradient around
the edge, to find the tip and the sinus (which, if present, corresponds closely
to the insertion point);
 Symmetry | virtually folding the leaf along an axis to measure how closely
the opposite edges line up;
5
2.3.2 Finding leaf tips
One specific problem that arises when identifying a leaf perimiter on a herbarium
sheet is that many leaves are held in place by means of paper strips. These are thin
white strips, typically glued to the herbarium sheet at either end, and held taught
across the leaf. In most cases, they are used towards the tip of the leaf, to avoid
directly gluing the leaf to the sheet. Any segmentation or edge-detection algorithm
that is guided by colour (or intensity) will tend to treat these paper strips as part of
the background sheet, and so will treat any part of the leaf tip protruding beyond
the strip as being a separate object. We therefore developed a specific algorithm to
address this problem. Given the primary axis of the leaf, defined by the primary
vein (as described above), we extrapolate this line beyond the main body of the leaf
blade and measue the intensity profile. If the tip is partially obscured by a paper
strip, then we expect this profile to clearly show the leaf tip beyond any paper strip.
main part of blade tip herbarium paper herbarium sheet strip sheet
If such a tip is found, we then adjust our estimate of the primary axis of the leaf,
and therefore the length, to reect the improved esimate of the tip location.
2.3.3 Leaf width
Once a pricipal axis has been determined, on which both the tip and insertion point
lie, we can then determine the width of the leaf. This we define as the greatest
distance from a point on the leaf margin to a point on the opposite margin in such
a way that the line crosses the principal axis at right-angles (see Figure ZZZ). If
necessarly, several widths could be defined in this way, such as the width 10% from
the tip, 20% from the tip and so on, in a manner similar to CITE Wilkin XXXX .
Here, we use a single width value, defined as the maximum width.
3 Results
Number of specimens photographed
Number of candidates found in stage 1
Number of candidates found in stage 2
Changes in leaf length by tip-finder
Distribution of leaf size by species
Correlation between maximum (minimum) size for extracted leaves vs. Pigott
ora (significant)
Absolute comparison - less impressive.
The extracted lengths of the leaves are, on average, much shorter than the figures
quoted by Pigott (1997). There are a number of reasons for this, included the manner
in which leaves are selected when writing formal descriptions; the manner in which
herbarium specimens are collected; the relative ease for a computer to find small
leaves rather than larger leaves;
When a botanist examines a specimen, s/he will use their expertise to select a
number of \representative" leaves. These will be leaves that are undamaged, healthy
and mature. Our algorthim cannot distinguish mature from immature leaves (a task
made even harder from dried herbarium specimensm, where leaf thickness and colour
may not be easy to acertain), and so many leaves that are extracted will be of a
typical shape, but smaller than described by the ora. When comparing the shape
6
of two leaves, we can use a scale-independent representation, such as elliptic Fourier
analysis or the time-series approach described earlier; however, when comparing
leaf length and width, these methods are irrelevant. Instead, we must reject leaves
that are significantly smaller than largest leaves typically found. We therefore use
a deliberately biased form of robust statistics, and reject all leaves below XXX% of
the largest area, and all leaves above YYY% of the largest area. These ranges are
defined for each species considered.
When mounting a group of leaves on a standard sized herbarium sheet, smaller
leaves are less likely to overlap with other leaves, by virtue of their size alone.
Discussion
